hello and welcome to cognitum a show
dedicated to exploring the present and
future of science and technology i'm
your host iosef gerstein
[Music]
our guest today is dr thomas seyfried
professor at boston college and author
of the groundbreaking book cancer as a
metabolic disease
professor seyfried welcome oh it's real
pleasure to be here thank you
so tell us about your vision of the
origin of cancer
well my view
is that uh of otto warburg's view
that cancer is a mitochondrial metabolic
disease
as he originally described in his work
from the early
1900s through the mid mid part of the
century
he claimed that cancer was basically a
disease of energy metabolism involving
the mitochondria of the cell
there have been a lot of controversy
associated with that view
with evidence that might be
on the surface inconsistent
but we have recently
delved into this in much greater depth
and found the missing link so so called
in otto warburg central theory
which is that they in addition to
in addition to lactic acid fermentation
using glucose as a substrate they tumor
cells also express succinct acid
fermentation
using glutamine as a substrate which we
refer to as amino acid fermentation
inside the mitochondria and we think
that will resolve a lot of the problems
associated with the understanding of the
origin of cancer
so
how does otto warburg's view on the
origin of cancer differ with what the
mainstream is in oncology
well the mainstream views cancer as a
genetic disease and this is clearly
stated on the
website of the national cancer institute
it's clearly stated in the majority of
textbooks
biology biochemistry cell biology the
medical books cancer is a genetic
disease
basically driven by what we call
damage to proto-oncogenes we refer to
these as oncogenes that make tumor cells
grow quickly
and we also have defects in these genes
that are supposed to slow down cell
growth the tumor suppressor genes
and
the almost the entire field has focused
on precision medicine
personalized therapies that deal
uh with the various types of mutations
that might be found in cancer cells
uh with the with the uh the the
understanding that this is uh primarily
a type of genetic disease that's the
what we call the dogmatic view
of what cancer is
and that essentially started with the
work of theodore bovary in 1914
when he uh considered from working
in a sea urchin
uh that
looking at cancer cells with broken
chromosomes
he felt that the origin of the disease
might be
due to some genomic
problem in the nucleus although he
apologized profusely
for his profound lack of knowledge
on anything associated with cancer
regardless of that and his apologetic
comments the fields seem to embrace
a purely speculative idea from someone
who knew very little if anything about
cancer
so
in your opinion it is not primarily a
genetic disease
no it's not a genetic disease at all
it's primarily a mitochondrial metabolic
disease as otto warburg originally
described
the gene mutations that we see in cancer
are largely downstream effects of damage
to the respiration so the mutations are
simply an effect that would be expected
from a defect in the ability of the cell
to generate energy through
respiration
so most of what is being studied in in
in the field today are epiphenomena
their effects they're not the causes
of cancer
and in my view this is the reason why we
have a continued crisis in this disease
with over 1600 people a day dying in the
united states and in china maybe as much
as 8 100 people a day dying and people
are dying all around the world as the
result of this fundamental
misunderstanding on the origin of the
disease
and what's the evidence that the origin
is metabolic and not genetic
well the origin of metabolic is all
cancer cells regardless of the tissue
that they arise in
show signs of fermentation this is these
are clear signatures of the kinds of
energy metabolism that goes on in the
cell
so most cancers in fact they refer to it
as the warburg effect an effect where
cancer cells produce large amounts of
lactic acid lactic acid is a waste
product of a fermentation metabolism
all cells on the on the planet were
fermenters before oxygen came into the
atmosphere so all organisms that existed
fermented before oxygen came into the
atmosphere cancer cells regardless of
whether they come from the brain the
colon
the bladder they are fermenters they
will ferment either lactic acid or
succinic acid using glutamine as a
substrate this is the common phenotype
of all cancers not the gene mutations
because we know every single cell in a
tumor has a different genetic
composition no two people have the same
composition of genes and there's no
cancer cells where a gene is constantly
seen
so this is what would be expected from a
downstream epiphenomenon not the origin
of the disease
but what about all of these genetic
markers like braco one bracket two that
seem to be so predictive of the
development of cancer in bracha one
bracket two case in breast cancer in
women well they're not so totally
predictive they have a penetrance of
about 50 percent which means that 50 of
the women that would have that mutation
never develop cancer cancer develops in
the breast of a woman with bracha one
only if that gene damages the
respiration of the of the cell
and that's where you see bracha one
expressed in mitochondria causes
mitochondrial damage now why some women
who have bracha one the same mutation
that another woman would have to develop
a breast cancer why that woman doesn't
develop the cancer as otto warburg said
there are many secondary causes of
cancer there's only one primary cause
and that's damage to the respiration if
bracha one damages the respiration in
the population of cells and that
individual the likelihood of cancer will
be high if the gene does not damage the
respiration these women have these
mutations and never develop breast
cancer
and that's true for every single one of
the so-called inherited risk factors we
don't call these causes they're risk
factors
person exposed to chemical carcinogen
might get cancer of the breast or some
other organ but not everyone exposed to
that chemical will develop a cancer so
the cancer is a the chemical carcinogen
is considered a risk factor not a direct
cause the carcinogen will cause cancer
only if it damages the respiration in a
population of cells if it doesn't damage
the respiration the risk of cancer is
very was very much lower
and is there evidence at the cellular
level that
damage to the respiration is the primary
driver of cancer
we know if we look at every can if we
look at all kinds of cancers under the
electron microscope you have to look at
these under the electron microscope
you'll see damage to the
damage to the structure of the very
organelle that's supposed to provide
respiration and in biology one of the
most fundamental tenets of the field is
that structure determines function
and this goes back to the evolutionary
concepts of of of darwin and others that
structure determines function if the if
the structure of the organelle is
damaged from electron microscopy
examination it's very likely
that that function of that organelle
will be damaged therefore it will not be
able to respire and cells that would
have those damages would be fermenters
and that's what the massive evidence in
the scientific literature has already
shown
and
could you could you speak to the nuclear
transfer experiments that helped you
come to this view which you outlined in
your book yeah well the nuclear transfer
experiments were a series of um
experiments that were done by some of
the leading developmental biologists uh
over the last many decades
so each many of these folks are what we
would call the specific leaders
dr yanish from mit
we would have jim morgan's group from
saint jude
we have a number of different groups
that have done these experiments
and their their goal was simply to ask
whether or not the nucleus of a tumor
cell could direct
development
and
it was interesting that they did these
experiments in an unbiased way they were
not challenging
the somatic mutation theory of cancer
which is the dogmatic view nor were they
investigating the mitochondrial
metabolic theory according to otto
warburg their goals were simply to ask
whether the nucleus of a tumor cell was
was capable of developing normal
development
and what was found is that basically
these
when you put the nucleus of the tumor
cell into a new cytoplasm containing
normal mitochondria
times the cells were growth regulated
forming tissues and organs consistent
with a normal developmental program no
evidence of dysregulated cell growth was
seen in any of these experiments now
what was interesting though depending on
the types of mutations or genomic
defects that were present in the cancer
nucleus that determined how far in
development that organism would go
before it aborted so it makes perfect
sense if you have a nucleus that has
broken chromosomes and missing genes
and trying to direct development when
that gene that's missing would be needed
to move the organism to the next
developmental stage is missing then the
whole organism implodes in an aborted
way and this is what was seen over and
over again in these kinds of experiments
so the mutations in the cancer nucleus
were not driving dysregulated cell
growth which is the definition and
signature phenotype of cancer they were
aborting development but but depending
on the kinds of mutations some of these
organisms could go through
significant periods of development
without
showing any dysregulated cell growth so
you have to look at all of those
experiments together as a group no one
of those experiments by itself would be
sufficient to overturn the somatic
mutation theory of cancer but when
viewed as a collection of studies it
becomes very hard to believe that cancer
could be due to nuclear gene mutations
in the nucle
mutations in the nuclear genome
and
other studies have shown that if mito if
if cancer mitochondria in an aggressive
tumor cell are replaced with normal
mitochondria you return that cell now to
a growth regulated state
and that was done by dr wong and her
colleagues at baylor college of medicine
so you can either transfer the nucleus
or the mitochondria and you get normal
mitochondria suppress growth abnormal
mitochondria will enhance growth
therefore the organelle calling the
shots in cancer is essentially the
mitochondria not the nucleus
so when you say somatic theory of cancer
that's the
mainstream view that genes cause cancer
it's somatic mutation theory somatic
mutation somatic mutation theory which
was proposed originally by
theodore bovary 1914
and then of course if you have germline
mutations in the genome like leaf raw
many as you mentioned the bracha one and
there's a number of these rare inherited
mutations those inherited mutations will
cause cancer only if they damage the
respiration because none of them are 100
penetrant if you have a gene that's 100
percent penetrant like in tay sachs
disease we work with a number of
different
metabolic
diseases that gene mutations are in fact
the cause of that because that when you
have the mutation there's a the
penetrance is 100 percent in cancer we
have no gene that's known to be 100
penetrant therefore but every cancer has
defective respiration therefore the
primary cause is defective respiration
whether it whether it occurs from a
nuclear gene mutation a radiation
exposure a hypoxia a carcinogen a viral
infection hepatitis c viruses viruses
enter cells damage the respiration and
you get and you put the path to cancer
there's two origins there's two
processes that must happen to get cancer
excuse me the first is damage to the
respiration
the second is the ability of the cell to
upregulate fermentation without
fermentation you can't get this the cell
will not will not become dysregulated
the genes that control fermentation are
oncogenes they're transcription factors
that upregulate fermentation so
obviously when the respiration is
damaged oncogenes turn on but they're in
effect they're not the cause they allow
the cell to transition into a
fermentation metabolism and that puts
the cell on the or on the path to
carcinogenesis
so fermentation is an older way of
deriving energy because and it's less
efficient it's not based on oxidative
respiration right that's true oxygen
it's an ancient these are ancient
pathways that existed for energy
metabolism before oxygen came into the
atmosphere
so when there is damage to the respirat
the ability of the cell to respirate it
goes back to an earlier way of making
energy and that's the
key problem the key problem is as long
as there are fermentable fuels in the
micro environment that can drive the
dysregulated cell growth you will then
progress through the process the
progression of the disease itself if
fermentable fuels become restricted that
cell can no longer can no longer divide
it it dies and this is what the
phenotype of cells before oxygen came
out to the into the atmosphere was they
were they were they were characterized
as having unbridled proliferation and
albert saint-gyorgy had described this
in his 1977 paper in pnas
that before oxygen all cells on the
planet were in this vigorous
fermentation metabolism of unbridled
proliferation and they would die as soon
as the fermentable fuels were exhausted
in the micro environment and the cells
would die and that's basically the
strategy that we think will be
ultimately responsible for the
resolution of cancer you simply deprive
them of their fermentable fuels
is there further evidence in support of
the
mitochondrial metabolic theory of cancer
over the somatic mutation theory well i
think i think you have to look at all
the evidence and you have to weigh all
the evidence together the fact that
we see damaged mitochondria in electron
microscopy tissue sections of the tissue
itself
not a lot many scientists are are given
misinformation or
fail to recognize
the full extent of what's happening from
cells and culture
because a lot of what cancer involves
today is growing cells in culture so you
can see they take up oxygen they give
what they give off atp oh their
mitochondria must be normal
they're dysregulated
in culture so you have to go back to
really see what's happening you really
need to look at the carcinogenic tissues
from patients or animals that have
cancer and then you can make a decision
if the organelle that that makes energy
from respiration is defective it's not
likely to work effectively despite what
the cell culture stuff may tell you
so you think that going deep into
personalized
cancer genomics is going to be a dead
end yeah it's complete that end
it's a waste of time and massive money
because what is the purpose you're
looking for mutations in cancer that's
supposed to be predictive of a diagnosis
or a therapy when they're essentially
downstream epiphenomena
so why do that in the first place and
then the other thing is where do you get
the tissue from to make the gene
expression profiles you need needle
biopsies you have to take a tissue from
a living person and you have to analyze
the genetic mutations in that tissue to
make a prediction on on diagnosis or
therapy now if the mutations are
irrelevant then putting a patient at
risk doing needle biopsy is is
unnecessary
so what's you know this is the thing and
it's been it's been numerous papers
shown in the literature that the very
aspect of taking a needle biopsy from a
patient changes the micro environment of
the tumor and therefore puts that if
that tumor is on it on a stage of of of
malignancy it can be thrown over the
over the uh the edge to form a full
malignant cancer so therefore the
profile that you get is no longer
relevant to what's going on in the
tissue itself and if the and if the
tumor is completely benign why why are
you sticking it in the first place to
get some information from a benign tumor
so the whole concept of needle biopsies
for cancer in my mind makes no sense at
all and puts many people at risk from
making their their cancer actually more
aggressive and metastatic
and what do you think is the difference
between metastatic cancer and
non-metastatic cancer the ability to
invade local tissue and spread through
the body is the k is the is the um
the major concern and we and others have
shown
especially john pollock and melissa john
powlik at yale and melissa wong at
oregon health center have shown that
these metastatic cancer cells are fusion
hybrids between cells of our immune
system and
proliferative cells that don't have the
capacity to metastasize
you have to realize that cells of our
immune system like macrophages all uh
which are a defensive cell in our body
already have the capacity to enter and
exit bloodstream to in move through
tissues these are the behaviors of
metastatic cancer and this is a genetic
program of a macrophage in our body the
problem is when these cells become
energetically corrupted they then are
dysregulated and they spread and invade
throughout your whole body and they
ferment they're powerful fermenters so
it's very easy to kill them once you
know that they're fermenters the problem
is this is not generally done
so you believe that
the basis of metastatic cancer comes
from the same programming as the the
programming of macrophages yes immune
cells so the cancer isn't sensitive the
metastatic cancer cell in our body is in
fact an immune cell and it's the most
powerful immune cell in our body making
it extremely difficult to kill
so they live in hypoxic environments
naturally so the anti-angiogenic
therapies which are designed to take
away blood vessels and this oxygen and
whatever they're not going to work and
they haven't worked so you can almost
predict
going through the types of therapies
that we use to manage cancer why most of
them don't work
why we do radiation we incinerate a
particular reason right then we put the
micro environment at risk for
inflammation possible return of cancer
if not we damage tissue significantly
why are we using toxic chemicals to stop
cell proliferation when you just have to
pull the plug on their fermentable fuels
i mean most of what we do in the cancer
field makes no sense once you understand
the biology of the problem and this is
the great tragedy this is the
responsible for the crisis we have today
the people fundamentally don't
understand the biology of the disease
you know this it's hard to
you need to correct that
and what causes the initial damage to
the mitochondria what what what stops
cells
continuing to respirate
well you can have any kind of insult to
a population of cells a small hypoxic
region an occluded milk duct
warburg clearly showed that
intermittent hypoxia damages respiration
and this can happen from a variety of
different reasons a wound a blow a
blood vessel that doesn't fully work in
a particular region you have systemic
inflammation so we now know that the
obesity crisis is putting many people at
risk for type 2 diabetes and cancer and
if you look at c reactive protein in the
blood of these patients of these
individuals you'll see it often high
what does that mean it means that there
is their body is in an inflamed
condition inflammation damages
respiration in particular populations of
cells in certain tissues it may vary
from one person to the next so you have
inflammation hypoxia exposure to
chemical carcinogens this damages
respiration
oncogenic viruses hepatitis c papilloma
viruses these all penetrate and damage
respiration and then you have the rare
um inherited mutations that put people
at risk so any one of these
any one of these provocative agents has
the potential to damage restoration and
and and increase risk for cancer so
cancer can happen from any one of these
this was referred to as the oncogenic
paradox
which plagued and perplexed the entire
cancer field for decades
even in sid mukherjee's book the emperor
of all maladies on pages 282 and 303 he
struggles with this how is it possible
you can link
cancer to a common pathophysiological
mechanism and that common
pathophysiological mechanism is now
recognized as damage to the respiratory
capacity of the cell produced by any
number of provocative agents either
inherited or from the environment but
all these are considered secondary the
primary the primary origin of the
disease first is damage to the
respiration followed by a compensatory
fermentation and that could be the
fermented fermentation of glucose or uh
glutamine amino acid so in order to find
the cause we need to see the effect on
the mitochondria first
if you can prevent damage to your
mitochondria the probability of getting
cancer writ is the risk is significantly
reduced
that's that's the bottom line
and i think that when you go back into
primitive populations on the planet
albert schweitzer going to africa
looking at native peoples in their
natural environment where cancer was
very very rare not even recognized or in
the inuits
of canada and alaska
these people on the very one that when
the uh westerners first went in there
there was no cancer in these people you
you you go and you find cancer
is very rare in natural populations why
because they're they're consuming their
environments are there are the way they
involved they they evolved in in these
environments the other thing that's very
interesting is humans and and uh
primates like gorillas and chimps have a
very close genetic composition but
cancer is so much less than chimpanzees
than it is in humans so that yet their
genome is almost is almost the same in
almost so many respects why is that
because the chimps are mostly eating
they're natural foods they're not being
subjected we have deviated from the path
of nature
and one of the consequences is a high
incidence of cancer and other chronic
diseases
and how do you think diet and interacts
with with cancer
well i think that
uh
diets that is that put us at risk for
systemic inflammation
uh can put on put us put ourselves at
risk for cancer
so i think that there are certain
components
in pr and super processed foods
that are not healthy that could
potentially create an inflammation
uh in our bodies and that contributes to
the risk of cancer all of these are what
we call risk factors there's no one
cause that you can say these are all
risk factors the only real cause is when
that risk factor damages the respiration
in a cell
so how do you prevent that
well you've got to keep your
mitochondria healthy and what's the best
fuel for keeping mitochondria healthy is
ketone bodies which you get when you
stop eating for several days
or a week blood sugar goes down ketones
go up mitochondria burn ketones and they
get extremely healthy only because
they're not throwing out reactive oxygen
species so it's a healing process and
that's why they talk about therapeutic
fasting water only as a healing people
this goes back to all the religions of
the world people always knew
intrinsically that by water only fasting
one would renew themselves well there's
a lot there's a strong biochemistry for
the logic of that the problem is in
western societies most people don't do
that anymore
and when you speak about water fasting
water only fasting what what what's the
time frame
it's hard to know it's depends on the
individual the age of the individual
whether they've practiced this or not
practiced this so that's why we
developed the glucose ketone index
monitor to allow us to know because the
idea is you're bringing the person into
therap into what we call a therapeutic
state
right therapeutic ketosis is when blood
sugar is down and ketones are elevated
within normal physiological ranges
so with the glucose ketone index
calculator an individual whether they
have cancer or not cancer wants to know
whether they can get into therapeutic
ketosis they might take a drop of blood
and they measure the glucose with one
strip put it into the meter get the
glucose
put the another strip ketone strip into
the meter and
get it and you get the ratio in
millimolar of glucose to ketones and
that ratio tells us what degree of
ketosis if we're in ketosis and what
degree of therapeutic ketosis we're in
so this is a biomarker to let an
individual know
if they're in a state of therapeutic
ketosis and that state would then
allow mitochondria to become rejuvenated
and would significantly reduce
cancer now how long it lasts we don't
know
we haven't done a lot of these
experiments
uh in that same state then also puts
massive pressure on tumor cells if the
tumor if tumor cells are already there
then they they need glucose the prime
fuel the glucose goes down they can't
use the ketones because their
respiration is damaged so they become
metabolically marginalized so it's a
very interesting
approach to both manage the disease and
also prevent the disease
so the theory has a lot of application
yes
and not only for cancer
the same problems of inflammation also
underlie
type 2 diabetes a lot of cardiovascular
disease as well as what we now think of
dementia and some of these other chronic
conditions that are afflicting uh many
many different uh people throughout
throughout the western societies
well i hope this knowledge becomes
integrated into practice
very well it's always easy it's much
easier to talk about it than to actually
integrate it because once people realize
what they have to do
they say you know this is
you do it tell me what it's like
thank you
thank you for joining us today we hope
you join us next time as we examine and
elucidate the frontiers of science and
technology with the thinkers creating
our tomorrow
until next time farewell
[Music]
you